---
title: Animating on the web
date: 2023-09-30
tags: [javascript, css, html]
draft: true
---

import Note from '@components/BlogPostNote.astro'

import AnimatedBox from './_AnimatedBox.tsx'
import AnimatedBoxWithCssTransition from './_AnimatedBoxWithCssTransition.tsx'
import AnimatedBoxWithStartingStyle from './_AnimatedBoxWithStartingStyle.tsx'
import AnimatedBoxWithRequestAnimationFrame from './_AnimatedBoxWithRequestAnimationFrame.tsx'
import AnimatedBoxWithWebAnimations from './_AnimatedBoxWithWebAnimations.tsx'

In this post we'll explore all the different ways animate on the web, with only
CSS and vanilla JavaScript.

For simplicity sake, we'll animate a box moving forward.

# CSS `animation` property

Let's start by using the CSS `animation` property.

This way of animating works by first describing your animation using
[`@keyframes`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@keyframes),
which is a way to declare the animation frames. For example, the starting styles
can be declared under `0%` or `from` and the ending styles with `to` or `100%`.

After defining our `keyframe`, we use it in the `animation` property, where we
also define the animation
[duration](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/animation-duration)
(`1s`) and the [timing
function](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/animation-timing-function)
(`linear`, in this case).

<AnimatedBox client:visible />

<Note>

  You may have noticed the usage of the `forwards` keyword in the `animation`
  property, [which is a value of the `animation-fill-mode` CSS
  property](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/animation-fill-mode).

  To understand this property, let's see how the animation plays by not using
  it -- the box will reset to its initial style after the animation finishes:

  <AnimatedBox withForwards={false} client:visible shouldShowCodeEditor={false} options={{ autorun: false }} />

  By default, the animation styles are applied only while it's executing. After
  the animation finishes, the box goes back to its starting position. With
  `forwards`, the box keeps the style as of the last animation frame.

</Note>

# CSS `transition` property

Now let's try doing the same thing with CSS `transition` property.

With CSS transitions, we no longer have `@keyframes`, instead we need to pass
which property we want to animate to the `transition` property, while also
specifying the transition duration and timing function. Whenever we change the
box style, changes to that property value will be animated.

<AnimatedBoxWithCssTransition client:visible />

In this example, we need a JavaScript trick to make the animation work when the
document loads -- it doesn't work with pure HTML and CSS. We need to force a
[reflow](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Reflow) with
`getBoundingClientRect` before adding the `animated-box` class for the
animation to play. If we used the `animated-box` directly in the HTML, without
this trick, the box will not appear moving forward, it will appear already in
its destination.

<Note>

In the future, we'll not need to use JavaScript to animate with CSS transitions
because of the upcoming
[`@starting-style`](https://chromestatus.com/feature/4515377717968896) CSS
rule.

<AnimatedBoxWithStartingStyle client:visible />

</Note>

# `requestAnimationFrame`

Now let's try using the `requestAnimationFrame` to do the same thing.

`requestAnimationFrame` is usually not the most convenient way to animate on
the web, specially in this case.

This is because `requestAnimationFrame` is an imperative way to do animations,
in contrast with the declarative way of CSS.

For example, there is no parameter to define the animation duration or timing
function -- `requestAnimationFrame` just receives a callback function to be
executed before the browser updates the screen visually (which is called a
[repaint](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Repaint)), so it's
our job to animate the box from scratch, including for how long and in what
way.

We will need to have some kind of infinite loop to repeatedly call the function
responsible for the visual changes, but we should these function calls with
`requestAnimationFrame` so our visual updates will only run when the browser is
ready to update the screen visually.

This usually means that our function will be called at most 60 times per
second. In this way, we can achieve a smooth animation and not waste CPU
resources/overload the browser.

In this example, you can see how many times the animation function is run in
the console:

<AnimatedBoxWithRequestAnimationFrame client:visible shouldShowConsole />

# Web Animations API

Fortunately, there is a much more convenient JavaScript API to animate, that is
similar to how CSS animations work but much more powerful because it's
JavaScript: the [Web Animations
API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Animations_API).

In the example below, we replicate our animation by calling the `animate`
method of the DOM element and pass an array of objects that represent each step
of the animation (this is equivalent to `@keyframes` in CSS) and in the next
object we specify the animation characteristics such as its duration, fill mode
(as we've seen) etc.

<AnimatedBoxWithWebAnimations client:visible />
